Sisters and brothers, we've had a long day today, and it's been an intense few days here at Synod. Many of us may already be tired, but it's my hope that that tiredness won't adversely affect the tone of this debate. I have been so encouraged by the very many gracious conversations that I've had over the last 48 hours. Thank you for this change of tone. My response, then, is to begin by offering, yes, yet another apology. We seem to have had a lot of apologies in the last few days. Perhaps we are simply trying to do too much. But this is a very personal apology, because I know that many of you were hoping for concrete proposals for implementing the previous decisions of Synod on LLF. I could give a list of excuses for why we're not yet able to do that, but instead I offer a simple heartfelt apology. It's not for lack of trying, and I want to add that I am determined to do everything possible to ensure that by July's Synod, we do have concrete actions. So please hear me when I say that within the paperwork you have, there is no intention for any rowing back, there is no long grass, there is only a desire to act according to the law and for the unity of the church. Something which, as I said on Friday, I see as core to my ordination promises. I offer this sincere and heartfelt apology because I am only too aware that my actions and our words and decisions have a direct impact on real people's lives, most particularly those of LGBTQI plus people. I've spoken before at Synod about the pain that I've heard expressed by LGBTQI plus people, and I want to say sorry for my part in causing that pain, understanding completely that you may feel the words are hollow, given that we've only been able to deliver very minor changes so far. I'm also only too aware that some still seem to think that the House of Bishops is hiding things. In answering one of the questions on Friday, I implied that legal advice may have got lost due to all the paperwork. I've apologised to Bishop Sarah for that misrepresentation, and I want to say once again very clearly that the substance of all the legal and theological advice relevant to the decision taken has been included in the Synod papers. So Synod, once again we are in a difficult place, and it's hardly surprising that in the last few days I've had requests to drop this item altogether from Synod, to avoid yet another long debate. I understand the motives behind this. I've also heard that there may be a request to move to next business or to adjourn the debate. Again, I understand this. However, my hope would be that we hear at least a good range of views on the proposed way ahead, even if we don't then get to a formal vote. I am also very clear that whether or not we get to a formal vote, the work goes on. Both the work of implementing the decisions already taken and the work of reconciliation and finding a way forward that most, if not all, can agree. So let me say a word, if I may, about why I am so committed to this work of reconciliation and finding an agreed way forward. I know that some here don't like the use of that word, reconciliation, in this context. Either because you think it's inappropriate in the context of oppression, or because you believe this is a first-order issue which we can't agree to disagree. However, I do believe it is appropriate to go on using the word, because I not only see it as the heart of the Gospel, but I also believe it is a particular gift of Anglicanism. And somewhere in the midst of all our anxieties, we seem to have lost sight of that. We were born in discord between Rome, Geneva, Canterbury. We grew up in disputes about the nature of the Eucharist, the question of whether clergy should be forced to use the same liturgy. It was in this context that Richard Hooker offered a comprehensive vision which held the extremes together. And now we have our own disagreements. Are they greater or smaller than previous generations? I don't know. But I would like to hope that we have learned something from our history. If the world needs to see what reconciliation with God looks like, then the wider church also needs the particular gift of Anglicanism. Brothers and sisters, I want you to know that this is personal for me. I am a missionary at heart. I'm not afraid to use that word, despite its negative connotations in some circles. My parents were missionaries in Indonesia. My grandparents, great-grandparents, and great-great-grandparents were missionaries in China. My wife and I served as missionaries in West Africa. And I don't want in any way to belittle the importance of today's discussions. They matter for all of us, and the whole church around the world is wrestling with them. Yet I have come to the personal conclusion that the missionary imperative is less about do we or don't we agree with same-sex marriage. That question alone is not going to decide whether the church grows or shrinks in the coming years. The missionary imperative in this day and age is reconciliation. At a moment in history when violence and the threat of violence is once again spreading around the world, the future of the church, I believe, rests on our willingness to be reconciled with God and with one another. And so to display to the world God's plan to gather up all things in Christ, things in heaven, and things on earth. My very personal appeal to you today is be reconciled to God, 1 Corinthians 5, and show this by being reconciled to one another. So what is the roadmap then to reconciliation that I'm offering? Well in the paperwork before you I've given an illustration of 10 commitments which might form the basis of an agreed way forward. Every one of you here today will find something in these commitments that you don't like, that you disagree with. However it's my sincere hope that we do not have a series of speeches which simply point out what you disagree with in the paper. Rather I hope the focus is on the principle of finding an agreed way forward. And if you really don't agree with that principle then please feel free to offer an alternative. I would love to hear it. But having said that I also hope we can avoid a series of speeches simply saying Synod needs to agree with me or others just need to change their minds. This isn't going to happen. And you may not think that what I'm suggesting stands any chance of success either. You may be right. But I'm asking for a chance to try and to quote 2 Corinthians 5 once again, if we are out of our mind, as some say, it is for God. If we are in our right mind, it is for you. If you agree with this way forward then the next few months will involve some intensive diplomacy, with me, the staff team, hopefully a wider group of bishops, clergy and lay people such that we can return to the House of Bishops and to Synod with some concrete proposals. I am absolutely clear that by July we must have those proposals to put before Synod. And my argument is that the best way to proceed is by some form of commitments or agreements such that we can then move swiftly to implementing the changes agreed. Sisters and brothers, with the hours that I've spent in conversation about this with different people in recent weeks, I know how passionately many people feel. And yet I dare to suggest that out in our parishes, our fresh expressions of church, our chaplaincies, our schools, people just want us to reach agreement and to get on with serving our nation. So my question is simple. Will you join me in looking for that comprehensive vision which holds together both ends of the spectrum in some form of communion? What Archbishop Justin called in his presidential address, the variable geometry of communion. We know it won't be perfect communion. It never can be this side of heaven. But we have this vision in our Anglican roots and it's to those roots that we must return. Radical Christian inclusion means going back to our roots, back to scripture, back to tradition and back to 500 years of learning about reconciliation. I beg to move the motion.

So the motion is open for debate. There is a five minute speech limit. Nicky Grawke, followed by Helen King.

Nicky Grawke, Worcester 236. Synod, seven years ago I was called first in the infamous take note debate which precipitated the LLF process and promises of a radical new Christian inclusion. Seven long years. Chair, thank you for calling me. Somehow I'm here again. It feels a little Groundhog Day. I spoke then from the silent middle, a middle which over these intervening years has steadily moved in a clear direction, gathering momentum. Many evangelicals have journeyed towards inclusivity, becoming advocates for change in their churches. Traditional congregation members who hadn't previously engaged have realised that they are in favour of blessing same sex couples. Anecdotally, around 80% of those in our pews. Many think we now can. After quiet rejoicing at media headlines last year, requests for services of blessing have started. Well intentioned but perhaps less well informed church wardens in vacancies agree to sort out arrangements only to be told they can't because we're stuck. Synod, we do need a reset. We need to move from fruitless arguments about why we can't bless same sex marriages to fruitful discussions about how we can. We need to become our best selves. Reconciled reconcilers. Those who oversee our legal advisors need a reset. We need to remind them that they are here to serve and support the direction of travel set out by Synod. They must be mandated to help us work out how we can bless gay couples, not why we can't. The House of Bishops needs a reset. Bishops, you are called to be a focus of unity. Please don't let a very small minority amongst you divert you to differentiation. Be courageous in holding differences in your diocese. It's what we have always done. We are a broad church. Most of the clergy who with integrity cannot use the prayers of love and faith themselves are content to coexist with neighbours who can for the sake of unity. Bishops, please lead us in modelling how we do this. How we can together hold structural unity, not why we can't. It might be messy, but it's what you're called to do. Please use the power you undoubtedly have responsibly and wisely. Synod, we voted for change and we voted for change as one church. A small vocal minority is using this issue to orchestrate separation, splitting the church we love. But most people are able to disagree with others and remain in communion with them. Most Christians find ways to rejoice over what unites us and work around what divides us without crying heresy or threatening legal action. Most humbly desire honesty and transparency, reconciliation and breadth. Let's find out how we can be those people, not why we can't. I'm grateful to Bishop Martin for the undefended manner in which he is leading this process and to both him and Bishop Helen Anne for their work in helping us engage differently from now on. Polarisation is rarely productive, but we need to move forward. Synod, please, let's commit to discerning how we can be radically inclusive and bring to an end plotting why we can't. Let's bless those who long for their marriages to be recognised by their church, our church. Let's get this done and move on with grace together in unity.

Helen King, followed by Jane Rosam.

Helen King, Oxford 378. Thank you for calling me, Mr Chairman. I find it difficult to support the motion that we have before us because like the document behind it, it leaves so many things unclear. I found what Bishop Martin said at the beginning of this debate helpful in clarifying some of that, but not yet all of it. And particular thanks to him for reminding us at the outset of this debate that this is about people, not about abstract issues. In the annex C to the document, we have a list of who's doing what, which is not the sort of management chart that I really like to see. I don't know how it all relates. There's a programme team in place. There's programme governance. We still don't know whether that's going to be two bishops or a group of bishops. There's a policy development advisory group who seem to be doing pastoral reassurance. There's a pastoral consultation group which will identify members in the second quarter of this year and then start work in the fourth quarter. Why then? There are engagement groups. There's work with the Faith and Order Commission, and we've already heard from Bishop Robert on how LLF is continually making demands on them. And there's engagement with the Clergy Discipline Commission. I don't see what's going to happen between now and July from this. And there's another group, glimpsed briefly through Notice Paper 5, which mentions a budget for residential meetings of stakeholders with a budget of £175,000. Now, is that the intensive diplomacy which Bishop Martin mentioned in his introduction to this debate? Is it like shared conversations was in 2015-17? If it is, if that's what intensive diplomacy is, getting people to sit down together over a residential period and get to know each other rather than just turning up at a meeting and giving some views, I really welcome that. Because unless we can appreciate each other as fellow human beings and fellow Christians, this is going nowhere, no matter how many groups are set up. And it's no good the bishops having these meetings. We ought to involve clergy and laity, and I'm very glad again that Bishop Martin mentioned that. And probably not just the usual suspects. Now, I speak here as a usual suspect. Yes, I'm trying to get out of this. I do the Diocesan Shared Conversations. I was in the LLF History Group and Interdisciplinary Groups. I've been to several meetings of inclusive stakeholders with the LLF team, one with the Archbishop of Canterbury, and with a few others. I was in a group last September that met three times on Living with Difference. I have no sense of how that really fed into anything. But what I've learned from that is it is very hard indeed for people to be in the same room as each other. We really have to do better at speaking to each other in each other's presence, and speaking about each other, and I don't exempt myself from that criticism. But if we're going to talk, we also need to talk about our ecclesiology. I'm a trustee of Westcott House. I'm also on Ministry Council. Some students from Westcott got back to me with their views on LLF, and they flagged up ecclesiology. What is the church? In what does the unity of the church consist? What is the role of a bishop? I agree, we need more work on all of those. That brings me to the point that our collective inaction at present, and the continued delays, are damaging, amongst others, ordinands. Ministry Council has identified many reasons for the fall in the number of ordinands, and because the papers are confidential, I can't go into detail, but there are many more reasons beyond LLF, COVID, and the shared discernment process. But by not proceeding according to the votes already passed by Synod, we leave all our candidates for ordained and for lay ministry in limbo. We go on damaging the church of the future, year after year. In addition to moving towards some intense and structured conversations, may I just suggest we could abandon issues now. There are clergy here at Synod who were ordained before issues was invented. It can be done. The church managed very well without issues. The church can rely on the wisdom and discernment of DDOs who, regardless of their own position on the broad spectrum of the church, have done and do their very best for the candidates who come their way. So let's abandon issues in the near future, and yes, let's have conversations of a depth that we haven't had before, including clergy and lay people. Thank you.

Jane Rosam to make her maiden speech. Is Will Harwood standing? Right, is he standing or not? He's not, okay. Jane Rosam, please.

Okay, so Jane Rosam, Rochester 389, and thank you, Chair, for calling me. I want Synod to speak from the heart, and in that, let me please tell you something of my parish. It is small, rural, and it is homogenised with three others into a benefice, an all-too-familiar picture along with a part-time priest who is run ragged, who in fact works more than full-time in what is an unachievable role. Well, it is unachievable if you want to do it well. We are a local church of local people, encompassing the whole breadth of traditions and views. We are held together by our desire for unity, to fit in with one another, and we work hard at it. We create space for each other and quite simply agree to disagree, but with kindness and respect. Ahead of Synod, I'm asked what is on the agenda and how is it going to play out, and I often feel almost too embarrassed to tell them, but I always try to reply with some positive hope. For my parish are people of hope. Like many parishes across the country, our living faith includes living with difference, and that difference includes me, a licensed lay minister and an Anna Chaplain who is married to Joanna, my same-sex partner, for over 30 years. And it includes other parishioners and our organist, who is much loved and valued by everyone and just happens to be the nephew of our church warden. Difference for us is like most of the country, an everyday lived experience. In our parish, we respond to it with love, and whilst love is our biblical command, we do not do it as a duty or a rigour, but because it is written on our hearts. And like most parishes, we also have an unending struggle to survive financially, and because of the love and positivity we give to everyone that tumbles out of our church doors, it is infused throughout our villages. So we are held and supported by our local people, who ensure our survival by their wondrous and moving efforts. So I hope you can imagine just how they feel, therefore, when they hear tale of their very large, very wealthy and very well-resourced neighbour, who have stopped contributing to their parish share, because they feel if they were to continue, that we could in some way taint them. Seeing their look of sadness as they discuss it, it just makes me want to weep. For my everyday parish could be called the skint little people, to quote the Alan Bates character in the Post Office drama. Skint little, generous, kind, loving, everyday people of faith, whose quiet voices are being drowned out by the very loud, shouty voices, whose constant barrage is felt as being oppressive and unkind. And as everyday, ordinary, everyday people, one body, they struggle to make that biblical connection. But do you know how they respond? They pass round the collection plate and they carry on, only now their hearts are a little heavier and the struggle a little more uphill. And I want to go home from here and tell them that I spoke up for them, I gave them a voice that was heard above the loud voices, and I spoke for all the ordinary little parishes just like them. But we are not going away. We are here and we always have been. All we want is a space to be the people that God made us be, and to journey together.

APPLAUSE

Rachel Webley, followed by the Bishop of Coventry.

Rachel Webley, Canterbury 076. Thank you Chair for calling me to speak. As a white woman committed to inclusion in every area of our church's life. I am a white woman committed to inclusion in every area of our church's life. I'm co-convener of the General Synod Anti-Racist Network, which was established in July 2022 in response to the challenge from Lord Boateng. I am alarmed therefore to read in GS 2346 and other recent communications relating to LLF, sudden references to GMH people without explanation. Bishop Martin has a strong record of anti-racist work and I have thanked him for his helpful intervention in yesterday's debate on racial justice. So this addition is surprising to me and I know to others here. I appreciate the genuine attempt at progress and plea for harmony by Bishop Martin who has bravely put his name to the work before us today. However, singling out one particular group, in this case GMH people, is unhelpful. Had this paper arrived before the deadline for questions, I would have asked whether all GMH members of Synod were consulted by Bishop Martin and if not, what criteria was used to decide who would have this privileged input. Suddenly spotlighting GMH people in a paper risks creating division and mistrust between Synod members, the opposite of that which is requested in GS 2346. Grouping GMH people together is at odds with an anti-racist approach that recognises the richness and diversity of thought among black and brown people, exactly as between those of us racialised as white. As you know, I am in favour of the prayers for love and faith and the decisions taken by Synod and I am grateful for Bishop Martin's indication that he will honour them. However, regardless of my own personal views, I cannot stand by and leave unchallenged this sudden co-option of an entire group on the grounds of their protected characteristic rather than relevance to this or any other debate. At my diocesan Synod in March 2022, I was asked about the impact of LLF on the Anglican Communion. I reminded my colleagues there that there is not a homogenous perspective in the Anglican Communion. For example, my friend who is a Methodist minister in a church that is expanding rapidly spent some of her sabbatical in Nigeria visiting colleagues who have remained in connection with the Methodist church in the UK, even after the decision here to marry same-sex couples. I highlighted also that the voices of gay Christians from many parts of the world are never heard in debates because it is just too dangerous for them to be visible and they are surely the most vulnerable in this debate. Grouping GMH people together in this way goes at odds with many things. As a priest in Canterbury Diocese, I'm grateful to Bishop Rose for her unequivocal and passionate support for the full inclusion of LGBTQ plus people in our church. In the difference course last week, Tina MacDonald writes, tension must come before reconciliation. Perhaps we have had a bit too much tension, but nonetheless, she also quotes Archbishop Desmond Tutu, a much-loved and mourned ally from Africa. True reconciliation exposes the awfulness, the abuse, the hurt, the truth. On Friday evening, we had a truly life-giving and, dare I say it, fun racial justice fringe. Bishop at St. Peter's Woolworth yesterday was, for me, a foretaste of the heavenly vision that Esther articulated for us yesterday. Please, could all those involved in delivering what Synod has asked for have regard for inclusion in its widest sense and please take care not to sow division along the way. Thank you. The Bishop of Coventry followed by Luke Appleton. Ruth Worsley, Coventry 14. Today I proudly wear the Cross of Nails that I was given on Christmas morning at Coventry Cathedral. You will know the story of this cross and how it has shaped the community of over 250 partner organisations around the world. Many of us share in the daily litany of reconciliation that marks the vision of the cathedral, the community and our diocese. God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself and has entrusted to us the ministry of reconciliation. Paul's words to the Corinthian church challenged this deeply divided community to live out that ministry. Bishop Martin's motion invites us all to join with him in a similar approach to how we explore together what God's reconciling love means for us as a church today and how we are then called to live together despite our differences and deep divisions. Such an approach is not without cost. This is not a cheap option but rather one that is fundamental to what being a follower of Jesus called to take up our cross requires of us. There are three principles on which this ministry of reconciliation is founded. Healing the wounds of history, learning to live with difference and celebrate diversity, building a culture of peace and justice. It begins with healing the wounds of history, recognising the hurts and harms of the past were a necessary part of rebuilding the relationships fractured by war. This could not be done by plastering over the cracks and hoping that healing would happen. Attention needed to be paid to take time, care and recognise the damage done to one another. We still have much to do in listening to one another's pain. We've spoken with regret and sorrow about homophobia but we need to understand how we have harmed sisters and brothers through our rejection of them as family members. Much like the earlier debate this morning, healing those wounds means giving greater attention to the language we use, ensuring that our words of apology are lived out in reality and for those of us who are heterosexual to be willing to learn from others' experience. And more needs to be done in listening to and learning from those who have yet to have their voice heard within a debate which has too often been had between those of us on the polarities of the conversation. It's only then that we can begin to learn to live with difference and celebrate the diversity amongst us. As with Rachel, like Esther, I long for the rich diversity of the whole people of God to be finally fully realised in the heavenly vision that John offers us. Whilst I wait with impatience for the fulfilment of that vision, I'm willing to seek to play my part in building a culture of peace and justice and I hope that you are too. I want to end with words from the Pledge of Transformation which is used by the Sister Network to that of the community of Nails. Together for Hope was born in 2018 as a partnership of secular and non-Christian faith-based organisations across Coventry and this is what they say and share together. For love which heals wounds, we will stand. For generosity which opens space for hope, we will stand. For nurturing which builds a culture of peace, we will stand. For compassion which seeks the best for all, we will stand. For respect which enables us to love with difference, we will stand. For humility which allows healthier relationships with others, we will stand. Together for Hope, we will stand. Brothers and sisters, let us commit to stand together in hope.

Luke Appleton.

Luke Appleton, Exeter, 309. I want to just prefix my speech just by acknowledging the fact that I am every bit as wretched and sinful as everyone else in this room and that all of us are only justified by the blood of Christ. I also just want to thank the Bishop for the tone of his presentation and for the commitment in the paper to transparency and honesty which I think hopefully everybody can agree with. I do just want to come back to the Bishop though around his comments around this being an Anglican approach because I believe historically and in a contemporary way that is unfortunately not the case and I want to just illustrate why I don't think that this approach will work. I've heard now on a number of occasions that the issue, and by the issue I mean the conflict, and this conflict, I'm saying afflicts because of the nature of the conflict, not what we're discussing, all of the Christian churches, I've heard it described as the new reformation and I think I'd agree with that. Once again we are faced in my view with a conflict between biblical Christianity and worldly compromise. That's my view, I'm being honest with you about it. I am however glad that my fellow Synod members here today are not going to burn me at the stake if they disagree with this speech. Clearly there's much about the Reformation era that we would not want to emulate. However, I would draw your attention to the Elizabethan settlement that has defined this church for over 400 years. The genius of this settlement is that the Anglican can accept every bit of it. Now of course there were people who couldn't sign up and they left the church. But for all the people that stayed in, they signed up to the whole settlement. High churchmen didn't just accept articles 1 to 15 and low churchmen didn't only accept articles 16 to 39. Everybody who stayed in assented to every aspect of it. And that is a principle that has been a defining part of Church of England Anglicanism ever since. I urge you to consider, and I say this as a member of the Prayer Book Society, Common Worship, a new liturgy. While I might personally detest this is my song and this is my story as a reverend, I don't have a theological objection to it. For all its flaws, Common Worship is a truly Anglican liturgy and could be used by everyone. Of course in recent years the Anglican approach was pushed to breaking point with the five guiding principles but they are principles in principle accepted by everyone. PLF and our approach with LLF will push that to breaking point, is pushing that to breaking point. It will in effect be the ending of the Elizabethan settlement because we will have become multiple churches within one institution. Half this chamber cannot and never will be able to accept this liturgy. We cannot walk together on this and we never will. Please I beg you for the sake of everyone here and for the Anglicans around the world watching us now who look to this church, who admire this church, who love this church, do not break us in this way. Thank you.

Having had half a dozen speeches on the main motion I'm going to move to the amendments and I'm going to call Joy Wadsley to move the amendment at 65.

Joy Wadsley, Oxford 186.

I just wanted to remind you you have five minutes.

Thank you. It almost seems a little indulgent especially at this point in the afternoon taking up synod time asking for an amendment that is about just one word of the motion before us. A change from welcoming the further work carried out on LLF to noting that work. But as Tilly the character in the sitcom Miranda says, bear with, bear with. It's not that there are not things to welcome in GS 2346. I suspect that we all welcome the Bishop of Leicester's tone and his heart. We welcome the emphasis on reconciliation and bridge building and renewed trust across the LLF divide. The call to listen, to find a way to live well with difference, the pursuit of honesty and transparency, the acknowledgement of the difficulties that remain in the implementation of the areas of work around the PLF. Perhaps you welcome talk of settlement that will hopefully enable you to continue within the Church of England. Perhaps you value the commitment to the experimental use of standalone services of PLF. Yet I believe that we must note rather than welcome the work that has been carried out. We are offered ten commitments. They are in draft form. We don't yet know how they will be refined. Each of them needs more detail and their wording is still to be negotiated. They represent a reset of the debate. For some of us that may feel like an unwelcome slowing down of the debate from all that happened at Synod last year. It seems to me that these are commitments that lack commitment. We don't know what we are welcoming. Just a few reflections. There is a commitment to devote ourselves to Scripture. What is the place of Scripture in this debate? Yes, let's actually grapple with the Bible, sit under God's word and see what it has to say about how we are to live our lives if we are to be holy as God is holy. Perhaps you were shocked and saddened as I was that we even have to mention the civil courts as a means to settle our disputes. And surprised too that here the commitment is made to explore the process for clergy and lay ministers to enter same-sex civil marriages. Immediately leading to an acknowledged diocesan postcode lottery and further threat to unity. What should be our primary witness to wider society at this time? Is reconciliation enough? Surely our primary witness in every age should be to the good news of the life, death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. His love for us and his call on our lives. The greatest need is for the people of this nation to hear this good news so that by believing they may have life in his name. Full life now and eternal life to come. To welcome is to be pleased about and to support something. To note is to pay it particular attention. I would respectfully suggest that we can only do the latter and that this amendment is actually a unifying amendment. What we may not be able to welcome we can all note.

Thank you for bearing with. I move the amendment standing in my name.

Bishop Martin to respond and to indicate whether he accepts, supports the amendment.

Thank you very much Shui. I appreciate greatly the way you've expressed that. I think I'm not minded to accept the amendment however simply because I'm not expecting anyone to do a song and dance about this in the sense of welcoming it but nevertheless as a different way forward focused on reconciliation I hope that Synod might be able to welcome that rather than note it. So I'm not accepting the amendment.

Well as Bishop does not support the amendment it will lapse unless 25 members stand in their places or otherwise indicate that they wish the debate on the amendment to continue and to vote to be taken on the amendment. I therefore invite members to stand and I see 25 members standing. Debate continues. Now it's very difficult to tell what people's views are on amendments because they're not recorded in the notices to speak. So one person in favour please. Those in favour of the amendment. Yes you sir. And against? You want to speak against the amendment? You madam. Three minutes.

Fraser Oates 238 Worcester thank you for calling me. It feels like we're caught in quite a miserable and exhausting cycle and without wanting to undermine the hard work that's gone into the motion and the paper it seems that we're just perpetuating this cycle by entrenching ourselves in division without really addressing the fundamental reasons why we are disagreeing so severely. If I'm honest I'm skeptical about a reset. I cannot see how we can agree to commitments or settlements while we continue to argue of these headlines but neglect to devote any time or consideration to the beliefs and the convictions that underpin them. Our church is divided. Our congregations are anxious and disorientated and people are walking away. Levels of trust are paper thin and legally and procedurally we've hit a brick wall and it's crushing for many of us. Around half of this synod and for many others across the country we continue to feel passionately and unwaveringly tethered to what has always been understood to be the right and clear teaching of Scripture which has given shape to the traditions that we've inherited. If our task is reconciliation and if the subject matter of our discussions and the unity of the church is worth fighting for and suffering over then we have got to wrestle with the real depths of our disagreement and come to some robust conclusions about our teaching, our practices, our ecclesiology, our mission or indeed we need to find pragmatic and gracious ways of making differentiation happen. As someone who believes in the current and historical teachings of the church I'm left feeling like I'm clutching straws. It doesn't feel like we're walking together even now. It feels like myself and many others are being slowly sidelined and I'm struggling to see my place here anymore. Therefore I'm compelled to resist the main motion or to abstain and I hope and pray that we can come up with a better way and as minor as this amendment might be it gives me a little bit of hope so I'm in support of this amendment. Thank you.

Three minutes.

Vicki Brett, Peterborough 382. I do welcome the change in tone but I'm angry. Three times in the Gospel of Mark Jesus gets angry. We know the stories. In Mark 3 he gets angry with the religious leaders for trying to stop him from healing the man with the shriveled hand. Their scriptures excluded disabled people from approaching the altar and from healing on the Sabbath. Go away, you're not good enough for God. Come back later when you are healed. Jesus was angry that they put religious rules above people. In Mark 10 Jesus gets angry when the disciples try to prevent the children coming to Jesus. Go away, you're not good enough for God. Come back later when you are grown up. In Mark 11 Jesus gets angry again. So angry he turns over the tables and gets out of wit. He quoted Isaiah and Jeremiah saying my temple will be called a house of prayer for the people of all nations but you have turned it into a hideout for thieves. The money changers had set up shop in the court of the Gentiles, the only place the people of all nations could go to worship but their place was turned into a market. Go away, you're not good enough for God. Jesus was angry with the religious establishment and the primary teachers of the law and his own disciples and all for the same reason. They were keeping people away from God. Warning, they were all religious people he was angry at, like you and me. Would Jesus be angry today I wonder? We asked for cake, specifically wedding cake and champagne so we could celebrate our relationships before our family and friends and most importantly before God. Instead of champagne we were offered bread and water. Go away, you're not good enough for God. Bread and water which we reluctantly and hungrily accepted because it was better than nothing. We took your offer of the outer court as the closest we could get to God. Then you snatched it away and said wait, wait a few more years, a few more months, wait. Go away, you're not good enough for God. Hope deferred makes the heart sick and we are heart sick, despondent. You said you were uncertain but we are not. We know there is good in our relationships just as there is good in yours. We know God loves us, all of us. We don't know if you love us. We know we are blessed, we know we are a blessing to the church. Why won't you bless us? Why won't you marry us? Why won't you celebrate our loves and our lives with us? Why won't you let us celebrate our loves and our lives with our family and friends and with God? Thank you.

Given the number of people who were standing during the debate on that amendment, I now wish to test the mind of Synod on whether item 65 has been sufficiently debated and I therefore put the motion for closure on item 65. Those in favour of the motion for closure on item 65 please show, also green text online. Those against. Motion is for closure is carried. We now proceed to vote on amendment 65. So those in favour please show. Green text online as well. Those against. Amendment is carried. So we move to item 66. I call Ed Shaw to move, to speak to and move his amendment at 66. You have five minutes.

Thank you Chair. Ed Shaw, Bristol 261. Yesterday the Archbishop of York said that a developing theme to this group of sessions was being honest about the past. My amendment seeks to be honest about the present so that we can build a more honest and united future. Reconciliation and bridge building takes honesty. As the Episcopalian priest Fleming Rutledge perceptively writes, it is not uncommon both in and out of the church for the people who do the most talking about reconciliation to be the ones who find it easier to smooth things over rather than struggle through them. My amendment is here to stop us from smoothing over the deep divisions that exist amongst us. Between bishops, clergy, laity and members of sexual minority groups like myself. We do not all believe the same things when it comes to identity, sexuality, relationships and marriage. I hope that is not news to anyone. But throughout the living in love process, in the shared conversations I was part of both, constant attempts have been made to smooth over these divisions rather than struggle through them. Appreciate how great and deep and painful they are. In particular, we have been implicitly and explicitly told that we can just agree to disagree, that these matters do not matter too much, that they are not issues of primary importance, that they do not impact the gospel, that we do not need to change our doctrine or structures. But they are issues of primary importance for so many of us from a range of different perspectives. They do impact our understanding of the gospel. They are leading to change in our doctrine and our structures will, I'm afraid, need to follow. My amendment simply seeks to be honest about the depths of our current divisions. Divisions that are deep enough to stop parishioners from giving to their churches. Ordinance from going forward for ordination. Priests from continuing in ministry. Bishops from moving together. Communion partners from communion partners from staying together. This is all about people, not issues. My hope in moving this amendment is simply to encourage those taking this process forward to be honest about the reality that we face and to shape not just a few commitments, not just a process reset, but a whole new way of doing the Church of England that will do good for all of us in this room and beyond. One that allows, in good conscience, parishioners, ordinance, priests, bishops, communion partners to stay together in new and imaginative ways. Sisters and brothers in Christ, we do need to be honest about the past. That has been a highlight of these sessions. But we also need to be honest about the present. If, if we are to enjoy a more honest and united future. I move the amendment standing in my name. So we'll go to Martin to respond and to indicate whether he supports the amendment. Thank you, Ed. And once again, I want to say thank you for the way that you've expressed this and for the intentions behind your amendment. On one level, I can agree in the sense of acknowledging. So I have heard it expressed many, many times by many different people. So on that level of simply acknowledging, yes, and your call to find new and imaginative ways is actually what I'm asking for. Exactly that. But I fear that's enshrining this in the motion is rather a counsel of despair of saying actually, there aren't any new and imaginative ways for us. So I am going to resist this amendment, in the hope that we can still find a way for reconciliation.

Well as the bishop does not support the amendment it will lapse unless 25 members stand in their places or otherwise indicate that they wish the debate on the amendment to continue and to vote to be taken. I see 25 members standing so the debate continues. Kenson Lee followed by Mark Smith. Three minutes, up to three minutes.

Kenson Lee, 493 Co-operative. Thank you Chair for calling me to speak. I would like to urge Synod to resist this amendment. The reason is that the phrase, there are matters we cannot simply agree to disagree, suggests that reconciliation is not possible. Love does not leave the judge to apportion its right. Love reconciles itself to its opposition with no regard to right whatsoever, says Hegel. Validity of our judgment shouldn't be measured against law or legality, for these can change or else we meet in vain, Synod. But they are measured against truth, which in and for itself affirms that reconciliation is not only possible, it is certain. It is certain because divine reality is experienced as certainty and actualised reality in Christ Jesus. This is the hope we as Christians have, even in deep disagreement, that we will and must move on from agree to disagree to a new level of mutual understanding, the recognition that the other affirms myself within themselves, that the LGBTQIA person in front of me affirms me as a person despite I'm a straight man. We overcome not people nor ideas, we overcome disagreement itself. Even the ultimate chasm between life and death has been bridged when God the Son died on the cross and rose on the third day. The reconciling yes of the resurrected Christ, which we all long for, will appear when we no longer differentiate between for or against change, inclusive or orthodox, but each acquiescing to the necessity of the other, the affirmation of reconciliation. It is possible because forgiving love fulfills the intrinsic claim in every being, the claim to be re-accepted into the unity which it belongs. Unity without difference is death. Reconciliation achieved after the dialectical process is life in the most holy trinity. I urge Synod to resist this amendment, which is not conducive to reconciliation and support the main motion. Thank you.

Mark Smith.

Mark Smith, Universities and TEIs 453 making my maiden speech. Synod, why is all this so hard? Why is this ongoing debate around LLF so exhausting? And depressing and painful? I think the amendment before us helpfully offers part of the reason. It is that we continue to engage each other on terrain that is at best only partly lit. That was evident in the written response to question 29, which said there is currently not agreement about what type or level of disagreement we are actually having, which contributes to difficulties in mapping out a way forward. That, I would like to suggest, is an understatement. Until we are clear on the level of disagreement, until we shed more light on that, we will remain largely in the dark and we will keep on talking past one another, we will keep on bumping into each other, we will keep on hurting one another. This amendment simply states the truth that for many in this chamber and in the wider church, our differences on LLF are not something on which we can agree to disagree. Many eager for change are motivated by deep-rooted and non-negotiable convictions about the justice and the equality and the welcome that the gospel demands. Many opposed to change are motivated by equally deep-rooted and non-negotiable convictions about the nature of the apostolic faith. This amendment names and honours the depth of those convictions. It helps to shed some light on where we stand. I think it also exposes a troubling disconnect between the real depth of our disagreement and the character of the proposals before us. So I want to say to the House of Bishops, my dear brothers and sisters, you claim to recognise that for many these issues are not ones on which we can agree to disagree and yet every single proposal, every single strategy, every single position paper that has come out of this process consistently presupposes that these are ultimately matters adiaphora and maps out a way forward on that basis. But that case has never been made theologically. It has only ever been assumed and asserted. The simple fact that we do disagree on these issues does not automatically mean that we should be disagreeing on them. A disputed matter is not necessarily a disputable matter. And yet as I read these proposals I discover time and again the governing theological paradigm is one of learning from one another, the gifts of different traditions, the building up of the body. That is only true if this whole issue lands within the tolerable breadth of the church's life rather than being something that intrinsically obscures or occludes the apostolic faith itself. And to decide in advance that this isn't an issue of apostolic faithfulness and then to push ahead may appear open-minded and generous and inclusive but there is a danger that it might instead be perceived as both a failure to listen and as a misuse of power which acts subtly to marginalise and delegitimise alternative perspectives. Well this amendment helps to dispel that unhappy perception. It names something about the depth of our disagreements. It sheds much needed light on the path ahead. I beg you to support it.

Before we proceed further I should remind us that we are due to complete the business before us by seven o'clock. Now I am hoping to persuade the Synod that you will give me another 15 minutes so that we might complete this item of business under item 66. Does the Synod give its general assent? Those in favour of giving general assent? Those against? So the ayes have it and we will extend the sitting by 15 minutes which means I can call two more lots of speakers now. Somebody in favour of the amendment? Gentleman in the blue shirt? Somebody against? Gentleman in the, facing me directly? Three minutes, up to three minutes.

Steve Wilcox, York 244. Chair, friends, I'm grateful for the hard work of the Bishop of Leicester and others in bringing us to this point. I'm not much of a farmer, though I did work on a farm for six months many years ago, but as we continue these vitally important discussions regarding LLF, two agricultural parables told by Jesus have been much in my mind. The first in Matthew 13 is the parable of the wheat and the tares. Strikes me that each of us here thinks the message we promote is the wheat and the message of those who disagree with us is the tares. On one hand some believe it's a critical issue of doctrine, on the other some believe it's a critical issue of justice. I'm under no illusion, I know some people in this room think what I believe is equivalent to tares and the question each of us is left asking is are we willing to accept that the other message will continue to grow however hard we might try to stop it. However hard we might try to stop it, it will continue to grow until the day Christ returns and brings all into judgment. Even if some of us leave the Church of England, the message will still be around. So will we acknowledge the existence of the other? The second in Matthew 7 is the image of the good and bad trees. Again each person in this room will identify different trees as being good and bad but my point with this parable is that the fruit results from the root, the tree itself. We're spending all this time talking about the fruit when in my view we need to spend more time considering the roots. As was argued so clearly more than a year ago in a paper by a group of bishops holding the traditional view of marriage, while the issues being discussed around the prayers and pastoral guidance are fruit issues, underlying these issues are root issues and the roots of the positions that are held in this room are very different and so we need, if we want to assess the fruit of the two trees, we need to allow the two trees to grow. We're having a discussion about how that might happen. In my view, I could be wrong, it'll happen as we have bishops upholding the positions in each diocese, vocational pathways supporting the positions in each diocese, financial structures enabling the positions in each diocese. That is why while I welcome much of GS 2346, I support this amendment and unless it is significantly, that the whole proposal is significantly amended I will oppose it but I don't want to dwell on those things now. What I want to dwell on are those two images. Let me ask us, have we learned from the parable of the wheat and the tares, will we accept the existence of one another and have we learned from the parable of the trees and their fruits that we need to let each tree grow properly to properly assess its fruit? Thank you.

Thank you very much.

Graeme Kirkspriggs Norwich 181. This is an incredibly concerning report and I cannot support it. I also cannot support this amendment as it strikes through any sort of settlement. I do believe that the side opposed to mine is Christian and should have a place within the Church of England. One part of this report that alarms me the most is the section from point eight on page five of the report and I quote, we recognize that not all bishops would be content to ordain or license such ministers and bishops must be allowed freedom of conscience in relation to LLF in the same way as clergy. Friends, this isn't structural differentiation, this is structural prejudice. It's entirely un-Anglican and presents a disturbing mindset that our Episcopal colleagues are only bishops to the people that agree with them. Sexuality is a protected characteristic like race, gender and disability. Even with the settlement on women in the Episcopacy and in ordained ministry, there is no sense that a diocesan bishop will refuse to license a woman simply because of the fact that they are a woman. No conservative diocesan, as far as I can tell, has said, well I'm not having any women in my diocese. This disturbing development development is wrong as well. Imagine if the reverse was being proposed, that an inclusively minded bishop could say, I will not ordain or license someone in my diocese who doesn't believe in equal marriage or who doesn't believe women should be ordained. This proposal creates an official and condoned postcode lottery as to where a whole swathe of people because of who they are will not be able to minister. Despite all our differences, is this a culture we really want to encourage in the Church of England? Reject this, reject prejudice and let us all, however we stand theologically, work together for something better than this. We hear that those who cannot support same-sex relationships need space where they can minister with integrity. That needs to apply to all and to the bishops I say, you have a choice. Once you put on that purple shirt and I'll give them the mitre and the staff, you can either be a focus for unity or factionalism, not both. Which, my brothers and sisters, do you choose? There is no unity in these proposals and no fairness either and many, like me, are watching.

So, somebody to speak for the amendment. Gentleman with the red shirt and somebody to speak against the amendment. The lady, you, madam here. Up to three minutes.

Karl Freeman, Exeter 118. I hope I'm going to be quite short about this, a mixture perhaps of theology and of pragmatism. I think when one thinks of the modern church, one thinks of the church as a place of worship, a place of prayer, a place of worship to God, a place of theology and of pragmatism. I think when one thinks of the more liberal position, the liberal has the advantage that they can do it to a degree flex. I remember being told by one DDO, Jonathan Saxby, if anybody remembers him, the thing you have to understand about liberality, Karl, is that you cannot be certain of anything. Therefore, it leaves you open to believe, providing you can justify it to some degree, to believe what seems right at the time. The opposite side of the spectrum of theology, perhaps the more conservative, is dealing more in command and certainty of what's been laid down in Bible. If you love me, you will keep my commands, said Jesus. So the more conservative is keener to say, well, what are your commands so that I can demonstrate my love to you? And even if I fail, it will be my it will be my aspiration, which is what's important, trying to do the right thing. And that's surely the same for all of us and the means by which we avail ourselves of God's grace. It seems to me on the pragmatic side of all this, that any solution to this particular aspect of the paper is going to have to be is going to have to be pragmatic. And if it can't accommodate the flexibility of liberality and the more certain position of more conservatism, how on earth are we ever going to come to doing anything together?

Lucy Gorman, 436 York. I want to speak to and resist this amendment. And I want to talk about this feeling of being unable to stay or feeling that we can't just simply agree to disagree. And there's nothing simple about it. I think the fact that we're here again shows that. This is not a new concept. I'm not trying to be all woe is me, but I have felt that my entire life in the Church of England. In fact, a lot of people have. If you're a woman, if you're neurodivergent, you're GMH, people with disabilities, victims and survivors of abuse, the list goes on. Unfortunately, feeling unwelcome by the Church of England is not this new phenomenon. Yet many of us do choose to stay. I am living proof. It is possible. And it's a choice I make on a regular basis. Is that not what we're called to do? To hold each other together? I've said this many times to many people. I am stood in the middle waiting and I will stay in the middle waiting. We can do this together. We need to move forward. We have voted for this twice. Like Bishop Martin said, let's get on with what we agreed to do, let's get the pastoral guidance sorted, let's get standalone services experimented and move on. I long for the day that we have a fruitful, joyous, uplifting debate around sexuality like we did yesterday on racial justice. pushing us on, bishops asking for us to all be heard before the debate ends, stunking speeches from the platform and I do believe it will happen one day. But as the Archbishop of York said, we need to look non-anxiously to the future without fear. Please do resist this amendment and let's carry on in the direction that we're going. Thank you.

Now I wish to test the mind of Synod as to whether item 66 has been sufficiently debated and I therefore put the motion for closure on item 66. Those in favour of the motion for closure on item 66 please show green ticks online. Those against? Motion for closure is carried. So I put item 66 to the vote and if it helps I am going to order a counted vote of the Synod.

Yes Chair, I would quite, Robert Thompson London 166, I call for a counted vote by houses.

Or do I see 25 members standing? Yes I do. So there will be a counted vote by houses and I direct that the bell will be rung. Thank you. So I order a counted vote. So I order a counted vote by houses. I'm about to ring the bell to all members the counted vote by houses to take place. Two minutes after it ceases the votes will begin. So I order a counted vote by houses and I direct that the bell will be rung. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. This is a counted vote by houses on item 66. Those present at Church House using the voting handsets and who wish to vote in favour should press one. Those against should press two. Those who wish to record an abstention should press three. Those participating remotely should use the online voting platform and vote or register an abstention using the buttons on the screen. The voting period is now open and will end in one minute. you you The voting period will end in 15 seconds. The voting period has now ended. So on item 66 the votes were as follows. House of Bishops in favour eight against 20 recorded abstentions two. House of Clergy in favour 83 against 92 recorded abstentions two. House of Laity in favour 86 against 98 recorded abstentions one. So the amendment is lost and I think that's a convenient time to adjourn until tomorrow at 9.15 after worship. Ladies and gentlemen, members of the Senate, good evening. For those whose diocese begin with certain letters and are invited to a reception at the library this evening, I can't remember the letters but you'll know who you are. L and M so that's Canterbury, Carlisle, Manchester, well I don't know, you know, L and M. We'll start a few minutes late so that I can and those of us who want to can participate in worship and the library is very kindly at short notice putting out some of our slave, the like the slave bible and that kind of thing so to be looked at if you're interested. Thank you. I noticed that the chocolate fairy has been again which is rather good. We're now going to move to item 67 and that is the amendment proposed by Jane Paterson. So Jane Paterson. Jane, you have up to five minutes.

Jane Paterson, Sheffield 409. Chair, thank you for calling me. Thank you to Bishop Martin. My amendment's intent is to welcome the greater emphasis on openness and transparency in GS 2346. So beginning with me, I speak as a single heterosexual woman who is happy to uphold the Church of England's historic doctrine on marriage. Trust, once broken, is difficult to regain. One prerequisite for resolving our current impasse is, I suggest, a realistic appraisal of where we are now. How can we move forward from the who knew what when questions of the last year about the seeking of or receiving of theological and legal advice before, during or after which meeting, particularly those of bishops? How can we move forward in this chamber from the habitual application of procedural devices to defeat every motion and amendment we oppose? The recent votes in this process have indicated it's highly unlikely that the synodical majority needed to introduce permanent liturgy for same sex blessings will be reached in the lifetime of this synod. From the speeches made, we clearly do not all believe the same things about human identity, sexuality, relationships and marriage. This is the reality. Annex A of GS 2346 illustrates a labyrinth of possible procedural and legal routes and attendant risks around the introduction of prayers. Sadly, it seemed to be, if not a messy, a messed up church. On Saturday, I went to the fringe meeting hosted by Bishop Martin, Nick Sheppard and Georgie Morgan. There was still misunderstanding between those who see this issue very differently. What is of first importance or a so-called red line for one is not for another and vice versa. Yesterday, the first part of this debate gave the same impression. Commitments have been given but not apparently honoured. With the reset, 10 draft commandments have been offered and our commitment has been sought to walk together. But how can we walk together to different desired destinations? And how can we agree to reach there? Any resolution, if not reconciliation now, will need the understanding of and acceptance by the majority of us of more than one outcome. Not just the one we each desire, but also the one others do. But the achievement of this depends on there being future-proofed, secure, pastoral reassurance sufficient for those in need, alongside the detailed pastoral guidance and the prayers. Openness and transparency are needed. They can help rebuild trust. I beg to move amendment 67, which stands in my name.

Can I just point out for subsequent speakers that actually the microphones do move, as does the podium, so most important you get your speech into the microphone. Bishop to respond, please.

Thank you very much and good morning Synods. I'm assuming, Jane, it was a slight slip of the tongue, but I want to assure you I'm not attempting to rewrite the 10 commandments. They are 10 commitments and, as I said at the beginning, only illustrative of what may be needed. I welcome your amendment, Jane. Thank you for reinforcing the sense of openness and transparency that we need and I want to just refer you back, I suppose, to the 10 commitments because within those we worked carefully on the wording where we've got, we will seek, so this is commitments three, we will seek the maximum possible level of transparency regarding legal advice given to the House of Bishops, acknowledging the complexities of such advice. As I've said before, that is only to be fair to staff who, I have to say, have done, I believe, a superb job in all of this, but to demand that every piece of legal advice is made public makes their job almost impossible. So I want to absolutely ensure, Synods, we are committed to openness, to honesty, to transparency in the best way possible and therefore I support this amendment.

Well, as the Bishop supports the amendment, then the method, the debate continues. So can I see someone against? You, sir. Thank you very much. And somebody for? You, sir. Three minutes. Up to three minutes.

Alan Doan, Chester 279. I'm struck by that phrase, openness and transparency. I want to speak into the silence. I want to talk about real reconciliation. I want to talk about openness and transparency with ourselves. I have to make a confession. I am impatient by nature. In York, it felt as though we retrieved the can from down the road. In November, it felt as though we had to go into the long grass to find the can. And at the moment, it feels as though the can is on the back of a lorry, which is moving away as fast as we can either run or walk. But I do believe in reconciliation. Reconciliation can only work when we are reconciled with ourselves. My faith journey began 70 years ago. My faith has deepened as time has gone on, but it's also grown and changed. You see, it has to make sense. I can't believe two mutually exclusive things at the same time. My knowledge and my experience has to be aligned to my theology. I'm a man of faith, but I'm not a man of blind faith. The right-hand side of my brain has to be able to speak to the left-hand side. My science has to be in phase with my theology. I was a chemical engineer for 35 years, but I've been a reader for 27. I feel reconciled with myself. I believe in an omnipresent God, a God who is in all places, but who is also in all things. He is in the science as much as he is in the theology. We only discover what God discloses to us. We can't simply ignore the fact that God is there too and push him into the gaps. He's still speaking with us. We could all trade verses of scripture, but the verse that keeps coming back into my mind is that any house divided against itself will fall. When I first read the paper that's been put before us, I thought that reconciliation was impossible, but I do believe it is still possible. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.

Neil Patterson, Hereford, 130. Some of you who follow this synod may have observed the two Pattersons, who are not, as far as I'm aware, related in any way, tend to seldom coincide on votes, so I hope this is a slightly novel experience to see you standing here to endorse Jane. I can't see, but wherever she is. Gosh, openness and transparency. I don't think we've seen much of them in the last year, and that's why I'm supporting this amendment. Even by the standards of the Church of England, the process we have undergone has been labyrinthine in the extreme. We know that there have been papers and advice, layers upon layers of meetings. More of those I have been in than you and others I have heard about, but still the constant sense that we never quite know who is making a decision, who is amending which text, and what will happen next. And if we are going to move forward together, as I believe we should, as one church united under God, then we have got to be clearer about what we are doing and how we do it in the process going forward. And so I endorse this, especially looking to the process that we expect to begin quite soon of meetings between key parties. We must not go into a place where we are put into rooms and managed, where papers are looked at and agreed and commented on and then come back in an unexpected form because nobody quite knows who's changing them. But also, it is a move to openness for us all. Part of the reason LLF is so painful is that we are trying as a church to come out of a place of hiddenness and hypocrisy. We all know, all of us who are LGBTQ know the harm of the closet and everyone who has stepped out of it is thankful to have done so. I plead with those in all three houses of the Synod who have not yet done so, to do so. But as a church as a whole, we are slowly becoming more honest about what we really believe. That's hard, we hear the depth of our division, the depth of the convictions that we hold that are so far apart. But until we own and speak about them honestly and truthfully at every stage of this process, then we will find it harder and harder to move forward. So please do vote for the amendment.

I'm going to test the mind of Synod as to whether item 67 has been sufficiently debated and I therefore put a motion for closure on item 67. Those in favour of the motion for closure on item 67, please show. Thank you. Green text online. Those against? So the motion for closure is carried. So we proceed to vote on item 67. So those in favour, please show. Green text online. Those against? So item 67 is carried. So we move to item 68. Charlie Scrine, Reverend Charlie Scrine to move item 68, please speak. You have up to five minutes.

Charlie Scrine, London 164. Bishop Martin has given us three aspirations. We will not row back. We will act according to the law. We will act for the unity of the church. But in reality, those three together have us stuck in a dead end, condemned to continue hurting each other. I am very grateful to Bishop Martin and to Bishop Helen Anne for proposing a reset based on bridge building and for publishing the material in the annexes. We urgently need a reset in how we have been speaking about each other and we need a way out of the dead end. This amendment, it does not delay. It does not commit us to any particular structure. It does nothing to dilute Bishop Martin's request that we speak better to one another. It removes the possibility that we will be voting for a set of commitments we've not yet seen. And it asks specifically for detailed work to be done on legally secure structural provisions so that they too can be placed before us for refinement, amendments, and votes. Last night, 177 members of this synod voted to acknowledge that many in this room simply cannot agree to disagree. 177 people said, we are here. And I know it was just an amendment, but did 210 people then vote to say, no, you aren't? I want to understand, is it that you don't believe that I exist or is it that you don't want me to be here? May I speak to the 210? If we're going to get out of this dead end, then at some point, I am going to have to vote for something that you want or you are going to have to vote for something that I want. And my suggestion is that we vote together for structures that will enable all of us to live with integrity within the Church of England. I hear the fear that to change any of our current structures is to destroy unity. I hear the accusation even that this is what some of us want. Please, no one is using this issue to orchestrate anything. I am so sorry you have heard me saying that. That is my fault. Please help me. How can I explain and be heard by you? The truth is I cannot see a way to maintain even a form of communion unless we explore structural changes. If you are uncertain currently about structures, you can vote for this amendment now and wait to see which options are produced. There is a journey to travel. As recently as May in the House of Bishops, there was a majority of one to remove even the mention of the word provision. But by October, they voted 24 to one to do further work on formal structural provision as soon as possible. My motion, my amendment asks for us to see that work and to travel that journey together. This is not a council of despair. It's a council of realism and hope. Our current precise structures, they are not of the essence of the church. Show me that you believe in unity by being willing to explore changes to structures. Lucy Gorman asked for a time when she could take part in a debate on sexuality like Sunday's debate on race. It could happen this year, or maybe next, within structures that allowed like-minded people to gather with competence to take decisions of integrity on a limited list of devolved issues set by this Senate. I would no longer be in your way, but we would both still be in the Church of England. I want us to have something clear, concrete, and transparent to examine at synod. I want proposals that might save the church from years more of hurting each other and save us from a split right down the middle. I want a route out of the dead end. I beg to move my amendment.

The Bishop to respond and to indicate whether he supports the amendment.

Charlie, I'm very grateful for the manner in which you speak and for your desire for unity, which I know is genuine. I am, however, going to be a bit more direct in my response to your question. I am, however, going to have to oppose this amendment simply because of what it takes out of the motion. So we are committed to delivering on the decisions that synod has already made. That, I believe, has to stay in the motion. I've stated publicly that that's what I believe I have been charged to do. However, I am sympathetic to what Charlie is saying and in view of the vote last night, similarly to the views clearly of many other people, which is why I take you back once again to the commitments. We have used the phrase in the commitments, minimum structural formal communion. And it is that level of communion that we want to be able to explore. We are not committing to any particular form of structure whatsoever. That is what we need to explore in the coming weeks as to what that needs to look like such that we can remain in a degree of communion and in unity together as a church. So I'm resisting this amendment while also giving that commitment to continue to deliver on what synod has already said and to explore what structural provision looks like. Thank you.

Well, as the Bishop does not support the amendment, it will lapse unless 25 members stand in their places or otherwise indicate that they wish the debate on the amendment to continue. And I can see 25 members standing, so the debate does continue. I'm going to go online to Gary Kenner. Can you speak, Gary, for up to three minutes? You are speaking for the amendment, are you? No, no, no. Just want to ascertain. Now, just behave, please, because frivolity is okay, but in its place. So please sit down. I'm going to call Gary Kenner. Technical problems on Zoom, but there we are. We'll get there in the end. Gary, can you hear me? Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Can you hear me? Excellent. Gary Kenner, Chair. Up to three minutes, Gary. Okay. Thank you.

Gary Kenner, Chair. Thank you, Chair, for calling me and thank you, Bishop Martin, for all the work that's gone into this document. On Sunday, as well as partaking in Synod on Zoom, I did have one eye on the League Cup final between Liverpool and Chelsea. As a lifelong Liverpool fan, I ended Sunday rather pleased. And I imagine if you were a Chelsea fan, I'm afraid you didn't. Two teams, two fan bases, two rivals. And rivalry in sport is very good, but let's be honest, at times, football can become a little tribal. We see the unattractive side of this in how fans speak about one another, how the tribe is defended, and it creates a lens through which we see ourselves and others, which isn't particularly helpful or godly. I wonder if there's a danger of slipping into this way of thinking when it comes to our position, our prayers of love and faith, and us and them that makes unity a challenge, but also influences how we view one another. How do we view one another at Synod, especially those we disagree with? If we invited the Holy Spirit to examine our hearts, what would he reveal? What would he say to me? In this report, I particularly value the emphasis on bridge building, how to value and view one another well. And this really is a principle we see in Scripture. Jesus says in Matthew 12, whoever does the will of my father is my brother or sister or mother, the church being the family of God, and the church being the family of God, brothers and sisters. And Jesus also says in Luke 10, love your neighbor as yourself. It goes on to define the neighbor in the parable of the Good Samaritan. So Scripture tells us in life, there are brothers and sisters, and there are neighbors. And this is the world that we live in, and these are the people that we are called to love. But let's be honest, both can be a challenge to love. I mean, who doesn't fall out with family from time to time, of neighbors? But we are called to love regardless, even when we disagree. So the question has to be, how do we disagree well and lovingly? Because we disagree profoundly right now. And it feels in all of this that we are trying to square a circle. So we do need to be honest about that. As others have highlighted, these issues are deeply felt. And until there's a clear path forward, I fear we'll remain in trials, because this is simply too big to agree to disagree. Our voting and our speeches indicate as such. I believe the only way forward to achieve unity is to bring formal structural provision that honors the conscience of everyone, allows us to disagree well and lovingly walk together. I think we need more than a commitment to explore this. We need to agree it as part of the motion. My hope is when we have this in place, we then can lovingly disagree well. Support the amendments and I encourage others to do so. And therefore, find a way to walk apart as closely as we can.

So I'm looking for someone in favor of the amendment. The lady in green, sorry. Someone against? James Wilson. Thank you.

Thank you for calling me, Chair. Sophie Clark, London 354. What does it mean to walk together? We've heard so many courageous speakers in recent years, baring their souls and sharing their pain with us. But we have also heard a lot about being united, particularly from our bishops. Sadly, I think we have a very different understanding of what that means. Is it united when amendments in both conservative and revisionist directions leave the house passing or failing by a single vote? Or when both our clergy and laity, again of all stripes, openly declare their lack of trust in our bishops as shepherds and overseers. Our synod and our church is utterly divided and it will remain divided regardless of what happens this week or in July or in the synods to come. There are those of us like myself who cannot support the direction we are traveling in as it goes against our conscience. And there are others who long for greater change which under our current structures, they're unlikely to obtain for years to come. Both sides will continue as we do now to scrap over every inch, every amendment amid the empty words about unity and walking together. This process is serving no one. It is not loving anyone well and it is not helping anyone, let alone everyone to truly flourish. For years now, we have the same arguments being rehashed and the same wounds reopened. Martin Luther once said, peace if possible, truth at all costs. Synod, our division here is just so deep. It is not unity when so many of us on both sides are left exhausted and in tears after debates like these. I do not believe that this is loving. Please, bishops, explore prioritizing different structures which allow one side of this chamber to seek the change they desire in full and which allow the other side of the chamber to hold to what they sincerely believe the Bible teaches. Set us free from this, bishops. Allow us to flourish. This house is divided. I implore you to seek a different, honest, loving, and sincerely united route which truly provides the best solutions for both sides. I will be voting for this amendment and I urge you, fellow Synod members, please, please do the same. Thank you.

So, James Wilson, please. Yeah.

James Wilson, 366 Manchester. Synod, as we consider a report which promotes reconciliation and bridge building, I urge you to reject this amendment which seeks to carve up the Church of England into silos. As some of you will be unclear on what structural provision might mean, and you can't be blamed for that, as concrete ideas haven't really been spelt out in this chamber. The CEC have proposed what they want from it in a position paper on their website. It's called securing an evangelical witness, although echoing what Nicky Grawke said in her speech at the start of this debate yesterday, I feel obliged to say not all evangelicals. But anyway, the paper includes asking for oversight from and ordination only by bishops they consider orthodox and, among other things, to be able to express the view that others in the Church of England are preaching a different gospel and are false teachers. Synod, this is not unity. It is schism in all but pension fund. And I believe it flies in the face of what Paul said about divisions in the church in 1 Corinthians. Now, whatever our views about the settlement which followed Synod's approval of women bishops, and I have my concerns, it was based on differing beliefs about ecclesiology. That was fundamentally different from this proposal. I haven't yet to hear any good theological justification for structural provision over prayers of love and faith when we didn't need it for, for example, when Synod voted to allow remarriage of divorcees in churches, but with freedom of conscience for ministers who had theological objections to it. It is important people have freedom of conscience, which is why no member of the clergy and no PCC will be forced to use the prayers of love and faith. But the idea that churches fall easily into two camps just doesn't reflect reality. I attended an inclusive and affirming evangelical church, but people with conservative views on sexuality still come along, and I know the opposite is true of conservative churches in our area. And as Jodie just powerfully outlined, many CofE churches just sit in the middle. No congregation in the Church of England is homogenous in their beliefs, and a vast majority live with differences of views on gender and sexuality, as with other issues. And we don't celebrate what went well with LLF before last February enough. For many congregations, doing LLF was a healthy and constructive process where people were able to talk about their differences and learn to live with them in the unity of Christ. Structural differentiation will undo that good work, as PCCs with diverse views will be forced to choose between remaining in Structure A or joining Structure B. What this amendment will do is take the division we're witnessing in this chamber and export it to congregations up and down the country. Synod, I urge you in the strongest possible terms to reject this amendment.

APPLAUSE

Someone to speak in favour of the amendment? Bishop of Guildford, someone to speak against? Gentleman there. Three minutes.

Andrew Watson, Guildford 20. Thank you, Chair. Synod, I stand in support of Charlie Screen's amendments and I'm grateful for him for drawing our attention to the answer to question 55 in our Synod papers, which reveals a virtually unanimous commitment within the House of Bishops to commission further work on additional formal structural pastoral provision as soon as possible. That work has not yet been done, otherwise there would be an annex D to GS 2346. But the paper does allude to it, both in the language of settlement and in Commitment 9, which is precisely seeking to avoid a postcode lottery as referred to with understandable concern by one of yesterday's speakers. Yes, bishops are called to be a focus of unity and I take that call very seriously, enjoying the rich diversity of the Diocese of Guildford and the invaluable presence and magnificent contribution of gay Christians within it. But we are also called to hand on entire the faith that is entrusted to us. And for some of us, whether rightly or wrongly, that is proving a point of tension right now, a tension that Commitment 9 is seeking to resolve. My only question around that commitment is focused on the adjective minimum in its final sentence, a word which I'd prefer to replace with the adjective proportionate. Were we to stop now, UC, I guess there would be many of us who would come to accept what's currently on the table, a suite of prayers, an opt-in rather than opt-out, and some simple system to ensure that everyone is treated fairly, that we remain a broad church at every level rather than the word inclusive being unwittingly used to shut people out. But the further we choose to move along this path, the greater will be the need for all four adjectives which Bishop Serra brought to that House of Bishops discussion last October, additional, formal, structural, pastoral provision. And that doesn't have to look like the kind of model that James Wilson has just criticised. The language of walking together is attractive, and personally, I don't intend to ditch my more liberal friends and colleagues unless they choose to ditch me first, for which I wouldn't blame them at all. But ecclesially, walking together only works where the parties are roughly agreed on the speed and direction of travel, or else it's what we call a frog march, with the majority, in this case, a relatively small majority, calling the shots. And we can choose to frog march our way ahead. There will need, at some point, to negotiate the two-thirds majorities of Canon B2 unless we truly subscribe to the doctrine that lawyers should say what we pay them to say, which is somewhat alarming in its implications. But in the absence of a measured provision proportionate to the nature of the changes envisaged, the consequences will be disastrous for the future mission of our nation and beyond, whose most predictable manifestations will include the desertion of some of our ablest troops, a serious recruitment crisis to replace them, increasing demoralisation and indiscipline in the ranks, and an ever-widening chasm with most of our Christian comrades across the communion. Synod, I welcome this amendment. Thank you very much.

Thank you. Thank you. Yes, please.

Simon Friend, Exeter 310. It's clear that this drive for structural provision has at the root of it the doctrinal question, of marriage of one man and one woman, a first order salvation issue. I'm wondering what it is about this one particular aspect of the purity code, which has now become some sort of boundary marker of true faith. Whereas justice, poverty, war, the environment don't generate anything like the heat they should for us as Christians. Personally, I blame the doctrine of original sin. The Augustinian view of original sin that bound Adam and Eve's action into a narrative of sexual shame intimately involved with the four. As John C.L. Gibson wrote, it's high time that the doctrine of original sin in the sense of a sexually transmitted guilt going back to a primal guilty pair was abandoned. Original sin wasn't about sex, nor should who's having sex with whom in 2023 be cast as a first order issue, something to tear the church apart over with structural provision. The original sin was eating of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Funny, isn't it, that the one thing God asked us not to do, we can't help but do, even all these millennia later, to know good and evil. Well, that's power, isn't it? That elevates us to the status of gods giving us mastery over mere mortals. And we are called to pay attention to power, especially the use of power of what we think is right or wrong. I wonder why God said, don't eat this fruit, you will surely die. As Brueggemann writes, no one dies in this text. This is not a reflection on death, but a troubled, anxiety-ridden life. That is a greater problem. And we've been suffering this sort of living death ever since, devising mechanisms like scapegoating where we conveniently project the corruptness with our own hearts onto whoever we suppose to be more sinful over there, and banish them to the structurally differentiated desert, which makes us feel so much better, doesn't it? Sex isn't the original sin. The use of the power of knowledge of good and evil to judge, split, condemn, and cast out the other, that's the original sin. As Christians, we believe that Jesus made himself the final scapegoat so that this cycle of shaming would end. So why can't we let go? Why do we cling on to redemptive violence like a survival instinct? Synod, I urge you to resist this amendment.

And I wish to test the mind of Synod on whether item 67 has been sufficiently debated. And I therefore put the motion for closure on item 67. Sorry, 68, sorry. Those in favour of the motion for closure on item 68, please show. Green ticks on nine, please. Those against? Motion for closure is carried. So we proceed to vote. I was going to say before I was rudely interrupted that I was going to order a counted vote of the Synod. Order. Thank you, Chair.

Robert Thompson, London 166. Given that this is such a significant vote and this amendment is so significant, I would ask that you call a counted vote by houses.

Do I see 25 members standing? Which I do, so there will be a counted vote by houses. I now order a counted vote by houses. I'm about to ring the bell to warn members that a counted vote by houses is to take place two minutes after it ceases. The vote will begin. I now order a counted vote by houses. This is a counted vote by houses on item 68. Those present at church house using the voting handsets and who wish to vote in favour should press one. Those against should press two. Those who wish to record an abstention should press three. Those participating remotely should use the online voting platform and vote or register an abstention using the buttons on the screen. The voting period is now open and will end in one minute. Thank you. The voting period will end in 15 seconds. The voting period has now ended. The voting period has now ended. So the voting on item 68 was as follows. House of Bishops in favour 8 against 24 recorded abstentions 2. House of Clergy in favour 78 against 98 recorded abstentions 8. House of Laity in favour 81 against 100 recorded abstentions 7. So the amendment is lost. So we move to item...

Miranda Threlfall Liverpool 156. Chair, under Standing Order 33 I'd like to propose that we move to next business.

So, Miranda having moved a procedural motion that this synod pass to next business. If that motion is carried, original item 6021 will lapse and it will not be in order to reconsider that question in the same form or in a form which is substantially similar within the lifetime of the synod except with the permission of the business committee and the general consent of the synod. So I'm going to call Miranda to speak for not more or up to three minutes as to why we should move to next business. I will then call the Bishop to respond. He will have up to three minutes and I will then consider whether we need further debate. So your three minutes. Thank you.

The first thing I'd like to say is this is not intended as any sort of partisan move. It's very clear from the conversations I've had with people from a very wide range of perspectives in this debate in the coffee room and from the speeches that we've heard so far that there are very many of us who feel we will not be served well by pushing this debate on to a final vote. Personally if it does come to a final vote I'll have to vote against this motion because I'm fundamentally uncomfortable and I'm with Charlie Scrone here on being asked to sign a blank check on a set of commitments which we've been told won't be exactly the ones in the paper but we've been asked or told not to debate and it doesn't seem to me that a vote on this motion will be the most constructive way forward. We've had up till now I think a fairly good debate and I'm sure that everything that has been said has been heard and will be reflected on deeply in the coming months by those charged with taking forward the implementation of our previous decisions on this matter and I'm grateful to Bishop Martin for his assurance in his opening remarks that that is the intention. I wouldn't presume to predict or suggest what the business committee might do with the space that this might open up in our agenda but I'd personally be delighted if it might give us the opportunity to debate our contingency business on food insecurity rather than simply spend another hour or so rehearsing all our well-worn arguments on this issue. We won't be able to consider this in exactly this format but there was no intention that we considered this again in exactly this format we heard that in Bishop Martin's opening remarks so I'd suggest we'd all be best served if at this point we took what had all been said in a fairly good spirit so far and we move on to our next business. Thank you. The Bishop to respond. Thank you Miranda and I'm grateful for your words again and the tone in which you have proposed this and the first thing to say is I'm very open to hearing what the view of Synod basically on whether we should move to next business. In light of that I am conscious that if next business is supported by Synod then this is my last opportunity to speak to Synod on this so I'm going to make the most if I may of the well two and a half minutes left to me. And thank you Synod for what has been a good debate and it does feel as if the tone has changed considerably that was my prayer coming into this weekend. I have heard what has been said I've taken copious notes we will go away and reflect on that. So now I want on your behalf to say a thank you to the staff working with me on this there is often a lot of focus on bishops and who's leading and who's doing what but please can we not forget the staff. I am enjoying hugely working with Nick Sheppard and Georgie Morgan on LLF and Isabel Hamley our theological advisor of course is leaving us from this role to go on to the challenges of a theological college instead. Can we say thank you to her in particular? I want to say that I'm looking forward to working with Jessica and Tom as they take over that role of theological advisors and I want to say a thank you to the legal team the central secretariat and all the staff who have been working on this and who often get a bit of a hard time from us as Synod. The question has been raised as to who is now leading this process. I want to be very clear that it is my intention straight after this Synod to make sure we put together a group who can do that. Yes bishops I will be looking among our numbers for others to join and I will be looking more widely in Synod as well such that we can have the sorts of conversations that a number of speakers have referred to. So in terms of next steps I am clear that the implementation of the votes already taken by Synod is a top priority for us. That sits alongside the exploration of what minimum formal structural changes look like though I welcome Andrew's comment about proportionate as well. What degree of communion is possible for us in this situation? You brothers and sisters would not be here I believe if you did not think that some degree of communion is still possible. That gives me great hope. It gives me great reassurance that we will find a way through this which allows as many as possible if not all to stay within the Church of England. This is God's church. This is God's church and it is to God that we look for guidance as we seek to move forward. Thank you Synod.

So the matter is potentially open for debate. I will call Chair of the House of Laity followed by W Buggs.

Jamie Harrison, Durham 301. Mr Chairman, over the years we have had many experiences together of movements to move standing order 33 for next business. Sometimes they have been aggressive, sometimes blocking, sometimes kicking into the long grass. This is not one of those moments. But there are one or two risks if we are not careful of how we use this standing order 33. Thank you Miranda for your very helpful and careful speech. One risk of course is that the wider church may see this as a rejection both of the direction of travel and also of Bishop Martin. It is very important that Bishop Martin hears from us as he has already been here how appreciative we are of what he is doing and to encourage him to continue in that work. So the first risk is it will be misunderstood what we are trying to do. The second may be a misunderstanding about rejecting perhaps all the commitments that he has highlighted and also the very helpful appendix which I think we have to take very seriously in a particular appendix A which gives us something of a road map option for the future. Looking back to a speech I made seven years ago in February in this place when the House of Clergy turned down the motion for the House of Bishops which triggered LLF, I am reminded of even looking back further to 1995 when we talked about how we would work together something to celebrate. That gave us some direction of travel which we did not take. And the risk of course of GS2055 seven years ago is again LLF being a wonderful movement it still did not help us on the road map ahead. So my plea I think is that there is a clear road map coming that we know exactly what the destinations might be and there may be a number of destinations and that with Martin and others we can find those roads, those maps that will help us to get there. So I think I am not particularly committing myself either way to what the synod feels here. I am very sympathetic to Miranda's speech and the fact that we can work within standing over 33 which does give us I think more flexibility than many might see in a move to next business. I think it would be more useful to do that than to adjourn because I do think we have had a good conversation and probably a vote will not help us at the end of this debate. Thank you. Debbie, up to three minutes. Debbie Buggs, London 353. I am sorry that we might be moving to next business because I think that silences the contribution from Mr Corns and I feel that we should be honouring him by listening to his speech. Particularly I want to say that he is calling us to think more about theological matters and I appreciate that Kenson Lee and Simon Friend have made a really good effort to do that in this debate by introducing theology into our debate. That is something we really need to do and clearly three minutes is not enough to do that. Kenson Lee covered a lot of ground. Some of it went over my head and Simon Friend also covered some theology. Again, not that I agreed with it but this is a place where we do need to start thinking about theology. This kind of set up is not ideal but let's do that work properly and I know that you will say that we have done that in the whole LLF process. Well, I am not sure that we have particularly and I would like to call us to listen to Andrew Corns's amendment, his speech and debate that before we close this debate. Thank you very much.

The length of the debate is at my discretion and I consider that the motion for next business has been adequately debated and should now be put to the vote. I remind members that if the motion for next business is carried, item 21 will lapse and it will not be in order to reconsider that question in the same form or in a form which is substantially similar within the remainder of the lifetime of the Synod except with the permission of the Business Committee and the general consent of the Synod. I am going to order a counted vote of the Synod on this motion. So there will be a counted vote of the Synod. So for the avoidance of doubt I direct that the bell is rung. I am about to ring the bell to warn members that the counted vote of the whole Synod is to take place. Two minutes after it ceases the vote will begin. So this is a counted vote of the whole Synod on the motion to move to next business. Those present at church house using the voting handsets and who wish to vote in favour should press 1. Those against should press 2. Those who wish to record an abstention should press 3. Those participating remotely should use the online voting platform and vote or register an abstention using the buttons on the screen. The voting period is now open and will end in one minute. So the voting period will end in 15 seconds. So the voting period has now ended. So now of course we receive all votes in silence as you already know on the motion to move to next business. They voted in favour 322 against 69 recorded abstentions 20. So the motion to move to next business is carried and we move to the next item on the agenda which is at 5.01. Thank you.
